AIP-40: Deferrable Tasks (#15389)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/apache-airflow/concepts/deferring.rst

Note that ``execution_timeout`` on Operators is considered over the *total runtime*, not individual executions in-between deferrals - this means that if ``execution_timeout`` is set, an Operator may fail while it's deferred or while it's running after a deferral, even if it's only been resumed for a few seconds.

Writing Triggers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Trigger is written as a class that inherits from ``BaseTrigger``, and implements three methods:

* ``__init__``, to receive arguments from Operators instantiating it
* ``run``, an asynchronous method that runs its logic and yields one or more ``TriggerEvent`` instances as an asynchronous generator
* ``serialize``, which returns the information needed to re-construct this trigger, as a tuple of the classpath, and keyword arguments to pass to ``__init__``

There's also some design constraints to be aware of:

* The ``run`` method *must be asynchronous* (using Python's asyncio), and correctly ``await`` whenever it does a blocking operation.

> * ``run`` must ``yield`` its TriggerEvents, not return them. If it returns before yielding at least once event, Airflow will consider this an error and fail any Task Instances waiting on it. If it throws an exception, Airflow will also fail any dependent task instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``run`` must ``yield`` its TriggerEvents, not return them. If it returns before yielding at least one event, Airflow will consider this an error and fail any Task Instances waiting on it. If it throws an exception, Airflow will also fail any dependent task instances.
```

Airflow tries to only run triggers in one place at once, and maintains a heartbeat to all ``triggerers`` that are currently running. If a ``triggerer`` dies, or becomes partitioned from the network where Airflow's database is running, Airflow will automatically re-schedule triggers that were on that host to run elsewhere (after waiting 30 seconds for the machine to re-appear).

This means it's possible, but unlikely, for triggers to run in multiple places at once; this is designed into the Trigger contract, however, and entirely expected. Airflow will de-duplicate events fired when a trigger is running in multiple places simultaneously, so this process should be transparent to your Operators.

Note that every extra ``triggerer`` you run will result in an extra persistent connection to your database.

Smart Sensors
-------------

> Deferrable Operators essentially supersede :doc:`Smart Sensors <smart-sensors>`, and should be preferred for almost all situations. They do solve fundamentally the same problem; Smart Sensors, however, only work for certain Sensor workload styles, have no redundancy, and require a custom DAG to run at all times.

Reviewer: Should we add a note on the smart sensors docs page pointing over here too?

Author: Added one.

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Deferrable Operators & Triggers
===============================

> Standard :doc:`Operators <operators>` and :doc:`Sensors <sensors>` take up a full *worker slot* for the entire time they are running, even if they are idle; for example, if you only have 100 worker slots available to run Tasks, and you have 100 DAGs waiting on a Sensor that's currently running but idle, then you *cannot run anything else* - even though your entire Airflow cluster is essentially idle.

Reviewer 2: This isn't strictly true for sensors in "reschedule" mode -- they will run, then stop and wait for the scheduler to send them back to a worker.

This is where *Deferrable Operators* come in. A deferrable operator is one that is written with the ability to suspend itself and remove itself from the worker when it knows that it will have to wait, and hand off the job of resuming it to something called a *Trigger*. As a result, while it is suspended (deferred), it is not taking up a worker slot and your cluster will have a lot less resources wasted on idle Operators or Sensors.

*Triggers* are small, asynchronous pieces of Python code designed to be run all together in a single Python process; because they are asynchronous, they are able to all co-exist efficiently. As an overview of how this process works:

> * A task instance (running operator) gets to a point where it has to wait, and defers itself with a trigger tied to the event that should resume it. It then removes itself from its current worker and frees up space.

Reviewer 2: > It then removes itself from its current worker and frees up space.

This sounds like something the each operator has to perform, but that isn't the case

```suggestion
* A task instance (running operator) gets to a point where it has to wait, and defers itself with a trigger tied to the event that should resume it. The worker is then free to execute another task in that slot.
```

* The new Trigger instance is registered inside Airflow, and picked up by one or more *triggerer* processes
* The trigger is run until it fires, at which point its source task is re-scheduled

> * The task instance resumes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The scheduler queues the Task Instance to resume on a worker node.
```

Using deferrable operators as a DAG author is almost transparent; writing them, however, takes a bit more work.

.. note::

    Deferrable Operators & Triggers rely on more recent ``asyncio`` features, and as a result only work
    on Python 3.7 or higher.

Using Deferrable Operators
--------------------------

If all you wish to do is use pre-written Deferrable Operators (such as ``TimeSensorAsync``, which comes with Airflow), then there are only two steps you need:

> * Ensure your Airflow installation is running at least one *triggerer* process, as well as the normal *scheduler*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure your Airflow installation is running at least one ``triggerer`` process, as well as the normal ``scheduler``
```

I think

* Use deferrable operators/sensors in your DAGs

That's it; everything else will be automatically handled for you. If you're upgrading existing DAGs, we even provide some API-compatible sensor variants (e.g. ``TimeSensorAsync`` for ``TimeSensor``) that you can swap into your DAG with no other changes required.

> Note that you cannot yet use the deferral ability from inside custom PythonOperator/TaskFlow code; it is only available to pre-built Operators at the moment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that you cannot yet use the deferral ability from inside custom PythonOperator/TaskFlow python functions; it is only available to pre-built Operators at the moment.
```

(Cos you can use deferabble operators inside a DAG that uses task flow, you just can't defer a `@task` function, right?)

Writing Deferrable Operators
----------------------------

Writing a deferrable operator takes a bit more work. There are some main points to consider:

* Your Operator must defer itself based on a Trigger. If there is a Trigger in core Airflow you can use, great; otherwise, you will have to write one.

> * Your Operator will be deleted and removed from its worker while deferred, and no state will persist automatically. You can persist state by asking Airflow to resume you at a certain method or pass certain kwargs, but that's it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Your Operator will be stopped and removed from its worker while deferred, and no state will persist automatically. You can persist state by asking Airflow to resume you at a certain method or pass certain kwargs, but that's it.
```

* You can defer multiple times, and you can defer before/after your Operator does significant work, or only defer if certain conditions are met (e.g. a system does not have an immediate answer). Deferral is entirely under your control.
* Any Operator can defer; no special marking on its class is needed, and it's not limited to Sensors.

Triggering Deferral
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to trigger deferral, at any place in your Operator you can call ``self.defer(trigger, method_name, kwargs, timeout)``, which will raise a special exception that Airflow will catch. The arguments are:

* ``trigger``: An instance of a Trigger that you wish to defer on. It will be serialized into the database.
* ``method_name``: The method name on your Operator you want Airflow to call when it resumes, other than ``execute``.
* ``kwargs``: Additional keyword arguments to pass to the method when it is called. Optional, defaults to ``{}``.

> * ``timeout``: A timedelta that specifies a timeout after which this deferral will fail, and fail the task instance. Optional, defaults to ``None``, meaning no timeout.

Reviewer 2: We need to document how this timeout and the existing execution_timeout interact.

(I _think_ that `execution_timeout` should be a total ceiling of runtime, i.e. time since task first started, right?)

Author: I think that is how I would interpret it too, and I suspect a bit of work is needed on that front.

> When you opt to defer, your Operator will *stop executing at that point and be deleted from a worker*. No state will persist, and when your Operator is resumed it will be a *brand new instance* of it. The only way you can pass state from the old instance of the Operator to the new one is via ``method_name`` and ``kwargs``.

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't use "deleted" as it could be confused with deleting the DB row.

* You can defer multiple times, and you can defer before/after your Operator does significant work, or only defer if certain conditions are met (e.g. a system does not have an immediate answer). Deferral is entirely under your control.
* Any Operator can defer; no special marking on its class is needed, and it's not limited to Sensors.

Triggering Deferral
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to trigger deferral, at any place in your Operator you can call ``self.defer(trigger, method_name, kwargs, timeout)``, which will raise a special exception that Airflow will catch. The arguments are:

* ``trigger``: An instance of a Trigger that you wish to defer on. It will be serialized into the database.
* ``method_name``: The method name on your Operator you want Airflow to call when it resumes, other than ``execute``.
* ``kwargs``: Additional keyword arguments to pass to the method when it is called. Optional, defaults to ``{}``.
* ``timeout``: A timedelta that specifies a timeout after which this deferral will fail, and fail the task instance. Optional, defaults to ``None``, meaning no timeout.

> When you opt to defer, your Operator will *stop executing at that point and be removed from its current worker*. No state will persist, and when your Operator is resumed it will be a *brand new instance* of it. The only way you can pass state from the old instance of the Operator to the new one is via ``method_name`` and ``kwargs``.

Reviewer 2: > No state will persist

could be a little more explicit. How about

> No state such as local variables or attributes set on ``self`` will persist
